Exploring Quantization Backends in Diffusers (#2852)
huggingface/blog: diffusers-quantization.md

---
title: "Exploring Quantization Backends in Diffusers"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/diffusers-quantization/thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: derekl35
- user: marcsun13
- user: sayakpaul
---

# Exploring Quantization Backends in Diffusers

> Building on our previous post, "[Memory-efficient Diffusion Transformers with Quanto and Diffusers](https://huggingface.co/blog/quanto-diffusers)", this post explores the diverse quantization backends integrated directly into Hugging Face Diffusers. We'll examine how bitsandbytes, GGUF, torchao, and native FP8 support make these powerful models more accessible, demonstrating their use with the Flux image model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Building on our previous post, "[Memory-efficient Diffusion Transformers with Quanto and Diffusers](https://huggingface.co/blog/quanto-diffusers)", this post explores the diverse quantization backends integrated directly into Hugging Face Diffusers. We'll examine how bitsandbytes, GGUF, torchao, and native FP8 support make large and powerful models more accessible, demonstrating their use with the Flux (a flow-based text-to-image generation model).
```

## Quantization Backends in Diffusers

```python
prompts = [
    "Baroque style, a lavish palace interior with ornate gilded ceilings, intricate tapestries, and dramatic lighting over a grand staircase.",
    "Futurist style, a dynamic spaceport with sleek silver starships docked at angular platforms, surrounded by distant planets and glowing energy lines.",
    "Noir style, a shadowy alleyway with flickering street lamps and a solitary trench-coated figure, framed by rain-soaked cobblestones and darkened storefronts.",
]
```

**BF16:**

> ![Baroque, Futurist, and Noir style images generated with BF16 precision](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/quantization-backends-diffusers/combined_flux-dev_bf16_combined.png)

Reviewer: Let's also provide an actual caption for the figure.

| Precision | Memory after loading | Peak memory | Inference time |
|-----------|----------------------|-------------|----------------|
| BF16      | ~31.447 GB           | 36.166 GB   | 12 seconds     |

### bitsandbytes (BnB)

> `bitsandbytes` is a popular and user-friendly library for 8-bit and 4-bit quantization, widely used for LLMs and QLoRA fine-tuning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`bitsandbytes`](https://github.com/bitsandbytes-foundation/bitsandbytes) is a popular and user-friendly library for 8-bit and 4-bit quantization, widely used for LLMs and QLoRA fine-tuning. We can use it for transformer-based diffusion and flow models, too.
```

**BnB 4-bit:**

![Baroque, Futurist, and Noir style images generated with BnB 4-bit](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/quantization-backends-diffusers/combined_flux-dev_bnb_4bit_combined.png)

**BnB 8-bit:**

> ![Baroque, Futurist, and Noir style images generated with BnB 8-bit](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/quantization-backends-diffusers/combined_flux-dev_bnb_8bit_combined.png)

Reviewer: Can we combine three images here?

1. BF16
2. 4bit
3. 8bit

Along with the caption?

> | BnB Precision | Memory after loading | Peak memory | Inference time |

Reviewer: Let's include the Bf16 numbers too.

|---------------|----------------------|-------------|----------------|
| 4-bit         | 12.584 GB            | 17.281 GB   | 12 seconds     |
| 8-bit         | 19.273 GB            | 24.432 GB   | 27 seconds     |

> **Example (Flux-dev with BnB 4-bit):**

Reviewer: We can keep the long-form code snippet under `<details>` so that readers can collapse as needed.

        "transformer": DiffusersBitsAndBytesConfig(load_in_4bit=True, bnb_4bit_quant_type="nf4", bnb_4bit_compute_dtype=torch.bfloat16),
        "text_encoder_2": TransformersBitsAndBytesConfig(load_in_4bit=True, bnb_4bit_quant_type="nf4", bnb_4bit_compute_dtype=torch.bfloat16),
    }
)

pipe = FluxPipeline.from_pretrained(
    model_id,
    quantization_config=pipeline_quant_config,
    torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16
)
pipe.to("cuda")

prompt = "Baroque style, a lavish palace interior with ornate gilded ceilings, intricate tapestries, and dramatic lighting over a grand staircase."
pipe_kwargs = {
    "prompt": prompt,
    "height": 1024,
    "width": 1024,
    "guidance_scale": 3.5,
    "num_inference_steps": 50,
    "max_sequence_length": 512,
}

print(f"Pipeline memory usage: {torch.cuda.max_memory_reserved() / 1024**3:.3f} GB")

image = pipe(
    **pipe_kwargs, generator=torch.manual_seed(0),
).images[0]

print(f"Pipeline memory usage: {torch.cuda.max_memory_reserved() / 1024**3:.3f} GB")

image.save("flux-dev_bnb_4bit.png")
```

For more information check out the [bitsandbytes docs](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/quantization/bitsandbytes).

### `torchao`

> `torchao` is a PyTorch-native library for architecture optimization, offering quantization, sparsity, and custom data types, designed for composability with `torch.compile` and FSDP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`torchao`](https://github.com/pytorch/ao) is a PyTorch-native library for architecture optimization, offering quantization, sparsity, and custom data types, designed for compatibility with `torch.compile` and FSDP.
```

`int4_weight_only`:
![torchao int4_weight_only Output](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/quantization-backends-diffusers/combined_flux-dev_torchao_4bit_combined.png)
`int8_weight_only`:
![torchao int8_weight_only Output](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/quantization-backends-diffusers/combined_flux-dev_torchao_8bit_combined.png)

`float8_weight_only`:

> ![torchao float8_weight_only Output](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/quantization-backends-diffusers/combined_flux-dev_torchao_fp8_combined.png)

Reviewer: Same as above. Let's have them side by side and add a note in the caption that readers can click on an image to zoom.

| torchao Precision             | Memory after loading | Peak memory | Inference time |
|-------------------------------|----------------------|-------------|----------------|
| int4_weight_only              | 10.635 GB            | 14.654 GB   | 109 seconds    |
| int8_weight_only              | 17.020 GB            | 21.482 GB   | 15 seconds     |

> | float8_weight_only            | 17.016 GB            | 21.488 GB   | 15 seconds     |

Reviewer: Same as above.

**Example (Flux-dev with `torchao` INT8 weight-only):**

> ```diff

Reviewer: Fantastic!

@@
- from diffusers import BitsAndBytesConfig as DiffusersBitsAndBytesConfig
+ from diffusers import TorchAoConfig as DiffusersTorchAoConfig

- from transformers import BitsAndBytesConfig as TransformersBitsAndBytesConfig
+ from transformers import TorchAoConfig as TransformersTorchAoConfig
@@
pipeline_quant_config = PipelineQuantizationConfig(
    quant_mapping={
-         "transformer": DiffusersBitsAndBytesConfig(load_in_4bit=True, bnb_4bit_quant_type="nf4", bnb_4bit_compute_dtype=torch.bfloat16),
-         "text_encoder_2": TransformersBitsAndBytesConfig(load_in_4bit=True, bnb_4bit_quant_type="nf4", bnb_4bit_compute_dtype=torch.bfloat16),
+         "transformer": DiffusersTorchAoConfig("int8_weight_only"),
+         "text_encoder_2": TransformersTorchAoConfig("int8_weight_only"),
    }
)
```

> For more information check out the [torchao docs](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/quantization/torchao).

Reviewer: Should we give a nudge to the users that we support almost all the exotic data-types from torchao in Diffusers configurations?

### Quanto

> Quanto is a quantization library integrated with the Hugging Face ecosystem via the [`optimum`](https://huggingface.co/docs/optimum/index) library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Quanto](https://github.com/huggingface/optimum-quanto) is a quantization library integrated with the Hugging Face ecosystem via the [`optimum`](https://huggingface.co/docs/optimum/index) library.
```

| quanto Precision | Memory after loading | Peak memory | Inference time |
|------------------|----------------------|-------------|----------------|
| int4             | 12.254 GB            | 16.139 GB   | 109 seconds    |
| int8             | 17.330 GB            | 21.814 GB   | 15 seconds     |

**Example (Flux-dev with `quanto` INT8 weight-only):**

```diff
@@
- from diffusers import BitsAndBytesConfig as DiffusersBitsAndBytesConfig
+ from diffusers import QuantoConfig as DiffusersQuantoConfig

- from transformers import BitsAndBytesConfig as TransformersBitsAndBytesConfig
+ from transformers import QuantoConfig as TransformersQuantoConfig
@@
pipeline_quant_config = PipelineQuantizationConfig(
    quant_mapping={
-         "transformer": DiffusersBitsAndBytesConfig(load_in_4bit=True, bnb_4bit_quant_type="nf4", bnb_4bit_compute_dtype=torch.bfloat16),
-         "text_encoder_2": TransformersBitsAndBytesConfig(load_in_4bit=True, bnb_4bit_quant_type="nf4", bnb_4bit_compute_dtype=torch.bfloat16),
+         "transformer": DiffusersQuantoConfig(weights_dtype="int8"),
+         "text_encoder_2": TransformersQuantoConfig(weights_dtype="int8"),
    }
)
```

> 

Reviewer: Should we include a note about the env configuration needed for float8?

For more information check out the [Quanto docs](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/quantization/quanto).

### GGUF

GGUF is a file format popular in the llama.cpp community for storing quantized models.

**GGUF Q2_k:**
![GGUF Q2_k Output](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/quantization-backends-diffusers/combined_flux-dev_gguf_Q2_k_combined.png)
**GGUF Q4_1:**
![GGUF Q4_1 Output](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/quantization-backends-diffusers/combined_flux-dev_gguf_Q4_1_combined.png)
**GGUF Q8_0:**
![GGUF Q8_0 Output](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/quantization-backends-diffusers/combined_flux-dev_gguf_Q8_0_combined.png)

> 

Reviewer: Same as above.

> **GGUF w/ `.enable_model_cpu_offload()`**

Reviewer: IMO, it would be much more prudent to present numbers with memory optimization after we discuss the available quantization backends. We could write something like -- "Most of these quantization backends can be combined with the [memory optimization techniques offered in Diffusers](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/en/optimization/memory). For example, using `enable_model_cpu_offload()` with `bitsandbytes` cuts the memory further, giving a reasonable trade-off between memory and latency." WDYT?

| GGUF Precision | Memory after loading | Peak memory | Inference time |
|----------------|----------------------|-------------|----------------|
| Q4_1           | 0 GB                 | 9.164 GB    | 28 seconds     |
| Q8_0           | 0 GB                 | 12.965 GB   | 22 seconds     |
| Q2_k           | 0 GB                 | 9.164 GB    | 31 seconds     |

**GGUF w/ `.to("cuda")`**
| GGUF Precision | Memory after loading | Peak memory | Inference time |
|----------------|----------------------|-------------|----------------|
| Q4_1           | 16.838 GB            | 21.326 GB   | 23 seconds     |
| Q8_0           | 21.502 GB            | 25.973 GB   | 15 seconds     |
| Q2_k           | 13.264 GB            | 17.752 GB   | 26 seconds     |

> **Example (Flux-dev with GGUF Q4_1)**

Reviewer: I don't think we have to be exhaustive about showing snippets for every configuration unless they vary significantly from one another.

# Path to a pre-quantized GGUF file
ckpt_path = "https://huggingface.co/city96/FLUX.1-dev-gguf/resolve/main/flux1-dev-Q4_1.gguf"

transformer = FluxTransformer2DModel.from_single_file(
    ckpt_path,
    quantization_config=GGUFQuantizationConfig(compute_dtype=torch.bfloat16),
    torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16,
)

pipe = FluxPipeline.from_pretrained(
    model_id,
    transformer=transformer,
    torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16,
)
pipe.to("cuda")

prompt = "Baroque style, a lavish palace interior with ornate gilded ceilings, intricate tapestries, and dramatic lighting over a grand staircase."
pipe_kwargs = {
    "prompt": prompt,
    "height": 1024,
    "width": 1024,
    "guidance_scale": 3.5,
    "num_inference_steps": 50,
    "max_sequence_length": 512,
}

print(f"Pipeline memory usage: {torch.cuda.max_memory_reserved() / 1024**3:.3f} GB")

image = pipe(
    **pipe_kwargs, generator=torch.manual_seed(0),
).images[0]

print(f"Pipeline memory usage: {torch.cuda.max_memory_reserved() / 1024**3:.3f} GB")

image.save("flux-dev_gguf_Q4_1.png")
```

For more information check out the [GGUF docs](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/quantization/gguf).

> ### FP8 Layerwise Casting (`enable_layerwise_casting`)

Reviewer: Could also write that can be combined with `group_offloading`:
https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/en/optimization/memory#group-offloading

pipe_kwargs = {
    "prompt": prompt,
    "height": 1024,
    "width": 1024,
    "guidance_scale": 3.5,
    "num_inference_steps": 50,
    "max_sequence_length": 512,
}

print(f"Pipeline memory usage: {torch.cuda.max_memory_reserved() / 1024**3:.3f} GB")

image = pipe(
    **pipe_kwargs, generator=torch.manual_seed(0),
).images[0]

print(f"Pipeline memory usage: {torch.cuda.max_memory_reserved() / 1024**3:.3f} GB")

image.save("flux-dev_fp8_layerwise_casting.png")
```

For more information check out the [Layerwise casting docs](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/main/en/optimization/memory#layerwise-casting).

## Spot The Quantized Model

Quantization sounds great for saving memory, but how much does it *really* affect the final image? Can you even spot the difference? We invite you to test your perception!

We created a setup where you can provide a prompt, and we generate results using both the original, high-precision model (e.g., Flux-dev in BF16) and several quantized versions (BnB 4-bit, BnB 8-bit). The generated images are then presented to you and your challenge is to identify which ones came from the quantized models.

> Try it out [here](https://huggingface.co/spaces/derekl35/flux-quant)!

Reviewer: Let's embed the space inside the blog post.

Often, especially with 8-bit quantization, the differences are subtle and may not be noticeable without close inspection. More aggressive quantization like 4-bit or lower might be more noticeable, but the results can still be good, especially considering the massive memory savings.

## Conclusion

Here's a quick guide to choosing a quantization backend:

*   **Easiest Memory Savings (NVIDIA):** Start with `bitsandbytes` 4/8-bit.

> *   **Prioritize Inference Speed:** `torchao` + `torch.compile` offers the best performance potential.

Reviewer: GGUF also supports `torch.compile()`. So does `bitsandbytes`. I think we should mention that.

*   **For Hardware Flexibility (CPU/MPS), FP8 Precision:** `Quanto` can be a good option.
*   **Simplicity (Hopper/Ada):** Explore FP8 Layerwise Casting (`enable_layerwise_casting`).
*   **For Using Existing GGUF Models:** Use GGUF loading (`from_single_file`).

> Quantization significantly lowers the barrier to entry for using large diffusion models. Experiment with these backends to find the best balance of memory, speed, and quality for your needs.

Reviewer: Should we hint the readers that they can expect a follow-up blog around training with quantization?

Reviewer 2: Yeah would be great !

## Quantization Backends in Diffusers

```python
prompts = [
    "Baroque style, a lavish palace interior with ornate gilded ceilings, intricate tapestries, and dramatic lighting over a grand staircase.",
    "Futurist style, a dynamic spaceport with sleek silver starships docked at angular platforms, surrounded by distant planets and glowing energy lines.",
    "Noir style, a shadowy alleyway with flickering street lamps and a solitary trench-coated figure, framed by rain-soaked cobblestones and darkened storefronts.",
]
```

### bitsandbytes (BnB)

[`bitsandbytes`](https://github.com/bitsandbytes-foundation/bitsandbytes) is a popular and user-friendly library for 8-bit and 4-bit quantization, widely used for LLMs and QLoRA fine-tuning. We can use it for transformer-based diffusion and flow models, too.

> 

Author: Not sure if this is what you meant by combining the images

---
title: "Exploring Quantization Backends in Diffusers"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/diffusers-quantization/thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: derekl35
- user: marcsun13
- user: sayakpaul
---

# Exploring Quantization Backends in Diffusers

<script async defer src="https://unpkg.com/medium-zoom-element@0/dist/medium-zoom-element.min.js"></script>
<script
	type="module"
	src="https://gradio.s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/4.36.1/gradio.js"
></script>

Building on our previous post, "[Memory-efficient Diffusion Transformers with Quanto and Diffusers](https://huggingface.co/blog/quanto-diffusers)", this post explores the diverse quantization backends integrated directly into Hugging Face Diffusers. We'll examine how bitsandbytes, GGUF, torchao, and native FP8 support make large and powerful models more accessible, demonstrating their use with Flux (a flow-based text-to-image generation model).

> 

Reviewer 2: let's do a quick introduction of the pipeline that we will be quantizing, share about what each components do, the memory it takes and what might be interesting to quantize.

Reviewer: I believe it could be done in bulleted points.

    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td colspan="3" style="text-align: center;"><em>Visual comparison of Flux-dev model outputs using BF16 (left), BnB 4-bit (center), and BnB 8-bit (right) quantization. (Click on an image to zoom) </em></td>
  </tr>
</table>

| Precision     | Memory after loading | Peak memory | Inference time |
|---------------|----------------------|-------------|----------------|
| BF16          | ~31.447 GB           | 36.166 GB   | 12 seconds     |
| 4-bit         | 12.584 GB            | 17.281 GB   | 12 seconds     |
| 8-bit         | 19.273 GB            | 24.432 GB   | 27 seconds     |

<sub>All benchmarks performed on 1x NVIDIA H100 80GB GPU</sub>

<details>

**Example (Flux-dev with BnB 4-bit):**

```python
import torch
from diffusers import AutoModel, FluxPipeline
from diffusers import BitsAndBytesConfig as DiffusersBitsAndBytesConfig
from diffusers.quantizers import PipelineQuantizationConfig
from transformers import T5EncoderModel

> from transformers import BitsAndBytesConfig as TransformersBitsAndBytesConfig

Reviewer 2: Maybe explain somewhere that we need to be careful when they import the configs `DiffusersBitsAndBytesConfig` and `TransformersBitsAndBytesConfig` since the components comes from different libraries and that if they don't want to deal with that, they can use [this](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/main/en/quantization/overview#pipeline-level-quantization:~:text=The%20config%20below%20will%20work%20for%20most%20diffusion%20pipelines%20that%20have%20a%20transformer%20component%20present.%20In%20most%20case%2C%20you%20will%20want%20to%20quantize%20the%20transformer%20component%20as%20that%20is%20often%20the%20most%20compute%2D%20intensive%20part%20of%20a%20diffusion%20pipeline.) instead

    </td>
    <td style="text-align: center;">
      int8_weight_only<br>
      <medium-zoom background="rgba(0,0,0,.7)"><img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/quantization-backends-diffusers/combined_flux-dev_torchao_8bit_combined.png" alt="torchao int8_weight_only Output"></medium-zoom>
    </td>
    <td style="text-align: center;">
      float8_weight_only<br>
      <medium-zoom background="rgba(0,0,0,.7)"><img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/quantization-backends-diffusers/combined_flux-dev_torchao_fp8_combined.png" alt="torchao float8_weight_only Output"></medium-zoom>
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td colspan="3" style="text-align: center;"><em>Visual comparison of Flux-dev model outputs using torchao int4_weight_only (left), int8_weight_only (center), and float8_weight_only (right) quantization. (Click on an image to zoom)</em></td>
  </tr>
</table>

| torchao Precision             | Memory after loading | Peak memory | Inference time |
|-------------------------------|----------------------|-------------|----------------|

> | int4_weight_only              | 10.635 GB            | 14.654 GB   | 109 seconds    |

Reviewer 2: any idea why it takes so much time ?

Reviewer: I remember I faced something while working on https://github.com/sayakpaul/diffusers-torchao. IIUC it was a combination of unavailability of a good kernel, shape constraints, etc.

<table>
  <tr>
    <td style="text-align: center;">
      int4<br>
      <medium-zoom background="rgba(0,0,0,.7)"><img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/quantization-backends-diffusers/combined_flux-dev_quanto_int4_combined.png" alt="Quanto int4 Output"></medium-zoom>
    </td>
    <td style="text-align: center;">
      int8<br>
      <medium-zoom background="rgba(0,0,0,.7)"><img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/quantization-backends-diffusers/combined_flux-dev_quanto_int8_combined.png" alt="Quanto int8 Output"></medium-zoom>
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td colspan="2" style="text-align: center;"><em>Visual comparison of Flux-dev model outputs using Quanto int4 (left) and int8 (right) quantization. (Click on an image to zoom)</em></td>
  </tr>
</table>

| quanto Precision | Memory after loading | Peak memory | Inference time |
|------------------|----------------------|-------------|----------------|

> | int4             | 12.254 GB            | 16.139 GB   | 109 seconds    |

Reviewer 2: same here

| int8             | 17.330 GB            | 21.814 GB   | 15 seconds     |

**Example (Flux-dev with `quanto` INT8 weight-only):**

```diff
@@
- from diffusers import BitsAndBytesConfig as DiffusersBitsAndBytesConfig
+ from diffusers import QuantoConfig as DiffusersQuantoConfig

- from transformers import BitsAndBytesConfig as TransformersBitsAndBytesConfig
+ from transformers import QuantoConfig as TransformersQuantoConfig
@@
pipeline_quant_config = PipelineQuantizationConfig(
    quant_mapping={
-         "transformer": DiffusersBitsAndBytesConfig(load_in_4bit=True, bnb_4bit_quant_type="nf4", bnb_4bit_compute_dtype=torch.bfloat16),
-         "text_encoder_2": TransformersBitsAndBytesConfig(load_in_4bit=True, bnb_4bit_quant_type="nf4", bnb_4bit_compute_dtype=torch.bfloat16),
+         "transformer": DiffusersQuantoConfig(weights_dtype="int8"),
+         "text_encoder_2": TransformersQuantoConfig(weights_dtype="int8"),
    }
)
```

> > **Note:** At the time of writing, for float8 support with Quanto, you'll need `optimum-quanto<0.2.5` and use quanto directly.

Reviewer 2: this is why you didn't put the results for float8 ?

Author: Yeah, would need to add code to show how to quantize with float8:
```python
import torch
from diffusers import AutoModel, FluxPipeline
from transformers import T5EncoderModel
from optimum.quanto import freeze, qfloat8, quantize

model_id = "black-forest-labs/FLUX.1-dev"

text_encoder_2 = T5EncoderModel.from_pretrained(
    model_id,
    subfolder="text_encoder_2",
    torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16,
)

quantize(text_encoder_2, weights=qfloat8)
freeze(text_encoder_2)

transformer = AutoModel.from_pretrained(
      model_id,
      subfolder="transformer",
      torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16,
)

quantize(transformer, weights=qfloat8)
freeze(transformer)

pipe = FluxPipeline.from_pretrained(
    model_id,
    transformer=transformer,
    text_encoder_2=text_encoder_2,
    torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16
).to("cuda")

pipe_kwargs = {
    "prompt": "Ghibli style, a fantasy landscape with a grey castle with multiple tall, blue-roofed towers, beside a clear, flowing river in a lush green valley.",
    "height": 1024,
    "width": 1024,
    "guidance_scale": 3.5,
    "num_inference_steps": 50,
    "max_sequence_length": 512,
}

print(f"Pipeline memory usage: {torch.cuda.max_memory_reserved() / 1024**3:.3f} GB") 

image = pipe(**pipe_kwargs, generator=torch.manual_seed(0),).images[0] 

print(f"Pipeline memory usage: {torch.cuda.max_memory_reserved() / 1024**3:.3f} GB") 

image.save("flux-dev_quanto_fp8.png")
```

Reviewer 2: yeah let's add the code but make sure to say that we will be working on fixing this.

    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td style="text-align: center;"><em>Visual output of Flux-dev model using FP8 Layerwise Casting (e4m3) quantization.</em></td>
  </tr>
</table>

| precision | Memory after loading | Peak memory | Inference time |
|-----------|----------------------|-------------|----------------|
| FP8 (e4m3)| 23.682 GB            | 28.451 GB   | 13 seconds     |

```python
import torch
from diffusers import AutoModel, FluxPipeline

model_id = "black-forest-labs/FLUX.1-dev"

transformer = AutoModel.from_pretrained(
    model_id,
    subfolder="transformer",
    torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16
)
transformer.enable_layerwise_casting(storage_dtype=torch.float8_e4m3fn, compute_dtype=torch.bfloat16)

pipe = FluxPipeline.from_pretrained(model_id, transformer=transformer, torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16)
pipe.to("cuda")
```

For more information check out the [Layerwise casting docs](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/main/en/optimization/memory#layerwise-casting).

## Combining with Memory Optimizations

> Most of these quantization backends can be combined with the memory optimization techniques offered in Diffusers. For example, using `enable_model_cpu_offload()` with `bitsandbytes` cuts the memory further, giving a reasonable trade-off between memory and latency. You can learn more about these techniques in the [Diffusers documentation](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/main/en/optimization/memory).

Reviewer 2: What would be nice would be to show some results here with `enable_model_cpu_offload` and `torch.compile` ! Maybe we can test these with bnb 4-bit as it is compatible with the main version. 

Then we can also combine all benchmark results and put it into a dataset so that users can easily compare.

Reviewer: Having a central dataset sounds good and it enables sysmatic exploration.

Author: Sounds good to me. Should I include code too? Not sure how to do torch.compile with pipeline level quant config

Reviewer 2: This would be a cool feature to add @sayakpaul in pipeline level quant config actually. Maybe you can open a PR @DerekLiu35 in diffusers to support this scenario ?

Reviewer 2: Yeah let's do that later !

## Spot The Quantized Model

Quantization sounds great for saving memory, but how much does it *really* affect the final image? Can you even spot the difference? We invite you to test your perception!

We created a setup where you can provide a prompt, and we generate results using both the original, high-precision model (e.g., Flux-dev in BF16) and several quantized versions (BnB 4-bit, BnB 8-bit). The generated images are then presented to you and your challenge is to identify which ones came from the quantized models.

Try it out here!

<gradio-app theme_mode="light" space="derekl35/flux-quant"></gradio-app>

> Often, especially with 8-bit quantization, the differences are subtle and may not be noticeable without close inspection. More aggressive quantization like 4-bit or lower might be more noticeable, but the results can still be good, especially considering the massive memory savings.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we can put that at the top since users will be definitely super interested in reading the rest to the blogpost after playing with the space !

## Conclusion

Here's a quick guide to choosing a quantization backend:

*   **Easiest Memory Savings (NVIDIA):** Start with `bitsandbytes` 4/8-bit. This can also be combined with `torch.compile()` for faster inference.
*   **Prioritize Inference Speed:** `torchao`, `GGUF`, and `bitsandbytes` can all be used with `torch.compile()` to potentially boost inference speed.
*   **For Hardware Flexibility (CPU/MPS), FP8 Precision:** `Quanto` can be a good option.
*   **Simplicity (Hopper/Ada):** Explore FP8 Layerwise Casting (`enable_layerwise_casting`).
*   **For Using Existing GGUF Models:** Use GGUF loading (`from_single_file`).
*   **Curious about training with quantization?** Stay tuned for a follow-up blog post on that topic!

> Quantization significantly lowers the barrier to entry for using large diffusion models. Experiment with these backends to find the best balance of memory, speed, and quality for your needs.

Reviewer: Let's make sure acknowledge @ChunTeLee for providing a nice thumbnail.

| precision | Memory after loading | Peak memory | Inference time |
|-----------|----------------------|-------------|----------------|
| FP8 (e4m3)| 23.682 GB            | 28.451 GB   | 13 seconds     |

```python
import torch
from diffusers import AutoModel, FluxPipeline

model_id = "black-forest-labs/FLUX.1-dev"

transformer = AutoModel.from_pretrained(
    model_id,
    subfolder="transformer",
    torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16
)
transformer.enable_layerwise_casting(storage_dtype=torch.float8_e4m3fn, compute_dtype=torch.bfloat16)

pipe = FluxPipeline.from_pretrained(model_id, transformer=transformer, torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16)
pipe.to("cuda")
```

For more information check out the [Layerwise casting docs](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/main/en/optimization/memory#layerwise-casting).

## Combining with More Memory Optimizations and torch.compile

Most of these quantization backends can be combined with the memory optimization techniques offered in Diffusers. Let's explore CPU offloading, group offloading, and `torch.compile`. You can learn more about these techniques in the [Diffusers documentation](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/main/en/optimization/memory).

> 

Reviewer 2: Can you also add the benchmark for each optimization ?

Explore some benchmarking results here:

<iframe
  src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/derekl35/diffusers-quantization-benchmarks/embed/viewer/default/train"
  frameborder="0"
  width="100%"
  height="560px"
  title="diffusers benchmarking results dataset"
></iframe>

## Conclusion

Here's a quick guide to choosing a quantization backend:

*   **Easiest Memory Savings (NVIDIA):** Start with `bitsandbytes` 4/8-bit. This can also be combined with `torch.compile()` for faster inference.
*   **Prioritize Inference Speed:** `torchao`, `GGUF`, and `bitsandbytes` can all be used with `torch.compile()` to potentially boost inference speed.
*   **For Hardware Flexibility (CPU/MPS), FP8 Precision:** `Quanto` can be a good option.
*   **Simplicity (Hopper/Ada):** Explore FP8 Layerwise Casting (`enable_layerwise_casting`).
*   **For Using Existing GGUF Models:** Use GGUF loading (`from_single_file`).

> *   **Explore Pre-Quantized Models:** You can find `bitsandbytes` and `torchao` quantized models from this blog post in our Hugging Face collection: [link to collection](https://huggingface.co/collections/diffusers/flux-quantized-checkpoints-682c951aebd378a2462984a0).

Reviewer 2: Maybe do a separate small section to give more visibility to these checkpoints ! The title of the section can be: `Ready to use quantized checkpoints` for example

**Model CPU Offloading (`enable_model_cpu_offload`)**: This method moves entire model components (like the UNet, text encoders, or VAE) between the CPU and GPU during the inference pipeline. It offers substantial VRAM savings and is generally faster than more granular offloading because it involves fewer, larger data transfers.

**bnb + `enable_model_cpu_offload`**:
| Precision     | Memory after loading | Peak memory | Inference time |
|---------------|----------------------|-------------|----------------|
| 4-bit         | 12.584 GB            | 17.281 GB   | 12 seconds     |
| 8-bit         | 19.273 GB            | 24.432 GB   | 27 seconds     |

> 

Reviewer 2: you put the same results as the one without `enable_model_cpu_offload`

**bnb + `enable_model_cpu_offload`**:
| Precision     | Memory after loading | Peak memory | Inference time |
|---------------|----------------------|-------------|----------------|
| 4-bit         | 12.383 GB            | 12.383 GB   | 17 seconds     |

> | 8-bit         | 19.182 GB            | 23.428 GB   | 27 seconds     |

Reviewer 2: feels like the memory saving are really low after loading the model no ? cc @sayakpaul

Reviewer: Isn't that expected? We're loading in lower-precision.

Reviewer 2: oh sorry i mean they are very close to when we are not using enable_model_cpu_offload, see the diff

Reviewer: Oh that is unexpected. It should look something like this:

<img width="599" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e520bb7b-89cb-42a8-b640-76de2ed2c82c" />

For 8bit models though even after applying CPU offloading, they will stay in CPU, so, that is there.

This is my script:
https://gist.github.com/sayakpaul/15cb0636fc829371a8991db56a13c377

**Group offloading (`enable_group_offload` for `diffusers` components or `apply_group_offloading` for generic `torch.nn.Module`s)**: It moves groups of internal model layers (like `torch.nn.ModuleList` or `torch.nn.Sequential` instances) to the CPU. This approach is typically more memory-efficient than full model offloading and faster than sequential offloading.

**FP8 layerwise casting + group offloading**:

| precision | Memory after loading | Peak memory | Inference time |
|-----------|----------------------|-------------|----------------|
| FP8 (e4m3)| 9.264 GB             | 14.232 GB   | 58 seconds     |

> 

Reviewer 2: a lot slower, is it expected @a-r-r-o-w ?

Reviewer: Yes, expected because (https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/main/en/optimization/memory#group-offloading): 

<img width="902" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/50c88c36-3a6e-469a-86df-9e24da247e80" />

Let's make a note that for most image-based models, `enable_model_cpu_offload()` and quantization work.

Reviewer 2: cc @DerekLiu35

**torch.compile**: Another complementary approach is to accelerate the execution of your model with PyTorch 2.x’s torch.compile() feature. Compiling the model doesn’t directly lower memory, but it can significantly speed up inference. PyTorch 2.0’s compile (Torch Dynamo) works by tracing and optimizing the model graph ahead-of-time.

**torchao + `torch.compile`**: 
| torchao Precision             | Memory after loading | Peak memory | Inference time | Compile Time |
|-------------------------------|----------------------|-------------|----------------|--------------|
| int4_weight_only              | 10.635 GB            | 15.238 GB   | 6 seconds    | ~285 seconds          |
| int8_weight_only              | 17.020 GB            | 22.473 GB   | 8 seconds     | ~851 seconds          |
| float8_weight_only            | 17.016 GB            | 22.115 GB   | 8 seconds     | ~545 seconds          |

> 

Reviewer 2: nice results !
